I can help you get more of what you want
create the highest form of discipline
how not to care about what other people
think that's the meaning of life right
there so Brian holiday the modern day
philosopher king whose books have sold
more than 4 million copies all across
the world helping people to live better
more meaningful lives we live in a time
where we procrastinate it's totally
screwed up why do we not prioritize our
health why do we not do the stuff that
we know we should do it's because we
think we have forever but the reality is
you do have a terminal diagnosis and to
live in rejection of that fact is to
waste your life so how do we change that
it takes a lot of courage and it takes a
lot of discipline discipline is the
ability to do hard stuff that you don't
want to do for benefits way down the
line and there's almost no one who is
successful in life who does not have
that form of discipline like if you can
cultivate that you're gaining Freedom
that a lot of people have never even
tasted but it's very hard to be
disciplined as you're stuffing your face
or if you feel like garbage you need
struggle so do something physically
difficult every day a strong mind and a
strong body you have to have both so
what do you say to those people that
find themselves completely absent of
apparent discipline it's such a critical
thing that you need is otherwise
somebody else determines whether you're
good or not and that's not how you want
to go through life so here's a set of
strategies that will help you whatever
life has in store for you the first
would be
quick one this is really really
fascinating to me on the back end of our
YouTube channel it says that
69.9 of you that watch this channel
frequently over the lifetime of this
channel haven't yet hit the Subscribe
button I just wanted to ask you a favor
it helps this channel so much if you
choose to just subscribe helps us scale
the guess helps us scale the production
and it makes the show bigger so if I
could ask you for one favor if you've
watched this show before and you've
enjoyed it and you like this episode
that you're currently watching could you
please hit the Subscribe button thank
you so much and I will repay that
gesture by making sure that everything
we do here gets better and better and
better and better that is a promise I'm
willing to make you do we have a deal
[Music]
Ryan how do you summarize
what you do and why you do it
why I do it is much easier for me to
articulate which is that I get better
for doing it like we tend to think of
philosophy as this thing that you
consume that you read or listen to but
it's it's actually more of like a
discourse it's a conversation and so the
process of writing about and talking
about and researching the stoics like is
made me a better person uh
because I've I've been actually that is
what stoicism is it's this process of uh
Reading Writing and debating these ideas
and that's how they sort of get into
your bloodstream and and then hopefully
in actual situations in your life you
apply them right so why I write about
philosophy is to me
much clearer what I would Define the
philosophy that I talk about
as that's a little tougher uh I I write
about an obscure School of Angel
velocity called stoicism maybe people
have heard of Marcus Aurelius or Seneca
or Epictetus that's the those are the
big three that we call them but
basically starting in ancient Greece and
making its way to ancient Rome there was
this
practical Philosophy for life so not
theoretical or abstract ideas sort of
unanswerable questions or Paradox that's
kind of what we tend to think of
philosophy as stoicism was like
how should a person live right what is
the good life how do I deal with my
temper how do I deal with the fact that
I'm afraid of death how what kind of job
should I have like what are my
obligations to other people philosophy
in the stoic senses was designed to be
the sort of guide To Living and
what I do is I I am continuing and
popularizing that conversation which has
been going on for something like 22 23
centuries one of the things you've
really reframed in a lot of people's
minds is that is the word discipline and
what it means yeah because the
definition of discipline that I
understood before discipline is Destiny
was this kind of painful restraint
despite my urges for the sake of some
kind of goal that I have yeah
um what is discipline in your definition
of the word and what that really means
that it's core well I think it's
important to note that the Stokes are
talking about self-discipline right so
discipline is not you know the marine
sergeant telling everyone else what to
do how to be right the Stokes are
talking about the virtue of
self-discipline which is you have your
standards that you selected for yourself
that you are living up to it's not a
weapon that you wielded in to other
people right and I think so often when
we hear discipline we think
disciplinarian right someone who's
really strict one of the beautiful lines
in meditations Marx realists is um
remember tolerant with others strict
with yourself and actually that that
itself demands so much more discipline
right to be like uh I never accept being
late for me or for other people right I
work hard I judge people that are not in
shape right I expect long hours from
everyone that works for me you know
there's that sort of rigid strict form
of discipline but to I I have found in
my own journey in my own life that it
actually requires more discipline to go
this is what I expect of myself
and this is how I'm wired this is how I
operate best and then I understand that
other people not only do I not control
them
but they have different proclivities
different ways of living different ways
of being
and that my job is to figure out how to
adapt myself to them instead of forcing
them to be like me Marcus to really is
it's fascinating he has this stepbrother
and there could not be more two more
different people than Marcus Aurelius
and his stepbrother Lucius Ferris and
Marcus makes this remarkable decision
soon after becoming Emperor which is
that he names his stepbrother this guy
has no blood relation to he names him
co-emperer the first thing he does with
unlimited power is he gives half of it
away to someone with an almost opposite
style of living being leadership and in
the beginning of meditations Marx
realist he talks about his brother like
at length he doesn't call him his step
brother calls him his brother and he
says you know
what I learned from my brother he says
I'm so grateful to have had this person
in my life a man whose character helped
me improve my own and the point was I
think not only did he have to learn how
to practice the virtues of acceptance
flexibility meeting people where they
are but Marcus had to adjust himself and
find the good in this person and and not
try to make this person just like him or
be disappointed and judgmental of this
person for not being just like them
right and so when we think of discipline
so often it's rendered as this form of
rigidity but I think the highest form of
discipline is the ability to it
to adjust and be flexible and adapt and
the really great leaders really great
people managed to get stuff out of
people who are not like them right they
don't write someone off because they
don't have the same high standards as
them or they don't get that person to
reach those high standards through Force
right or bullying or judgment but but
through example through inspiration
right through uh discussion and so I
don't know I'm trying to render
discipline not only in that sense but
I think often also when we think of
discipline we think about it in the
physical form right discipline is
running harder running longer lifting
more weight working more hours and that
physical discipline is essential and
there's almost no one who is successful
in life who does not also have that form
of physical discipline and in the
instruction you say discipline gives us
freedom which again feels like that's
typically not what people think of
discipline we think of discipline as
taking our freedom and making our lives
as you say more rigid yeah as you were
saying then like more rigid and less
less choices less optionality but in the
introduction of your book you say
discipline gives us freedom
Epictetus is this slave he's a slave in
Nero's court and
imagine the contrast this person who has
no Freedom completely impoverished their
body their work their labor is all
stolen from them and then they're
surrounded by not just opulence but
power right and ambition and fame right
be surrounded by the The Who's Who of
Roman life and Epictetus looks around
and he realizes
that he's Freer than all these people
and he realizes he's Freer than all
these people because
they're not in control of themselves
they might be legally free but they're
slaves to their ambition or their slaves
to the job they've gotten or their
family name or their urges their
Temptations right
and he realizes that if you're not in
control of your aversions and your
desires right he says these are the two
forces of human life what you want what
you don't want
if you're not in command of what you do
what you think
it really doesn't matter you know what
your legal status is right you're not as
free as you think you are
and I
think we've all experienced that you
you've met people you've probably had
them on the show
enormous Bank balances enormous
followings
uh hugely powerful jobs and then you
know they're like sorry I have a heart
out at 1106. you know or whatever right
like they're running from thing to thing
their phone is constantly ringing like
they're sitting here they're the
powerful person but someone's coming
whispering and like the assistant is
actually in charge right or or
um you know the the wanting the the more
the next thing the next accomplishment
that's what's really driving them and
and so you know the stoics were
successful and they did do things in the
world they weren't all like Epictetus
but they did they they understood that
if you're not in charge of yourself and
your life like your emotions your
thoughts you know what you will do and
what you won't do it really doesn't
matter what you can do you're not free
and and
when you are in this way of something
whether it's an addiction uh whether
it's momentum of your career
um whether it's just doing what everyone
else is doing like you're not
you're not free and so creating
structure and rules
it can feel limiting
and like you're giving up freedom but
you're actually gaining Freedom that a
lot of people have never even tasted
I've been thinking a lot recently about
um the commitments we make to ourselves
and the importance of keeping those
commitments sure and I'm thinking when I
say that I mean the small things I'm
gonna do this yeah I mean it's Jordan
Peterson might say like I'm gonna make
my bed well or it could be I'm gonna
quit quit drinking alcohol or I'm gonna
have vegetables instead of I don't know
Pizza
these small commitments we make and the
impact they have on the story We believe
about ourselves yeah and I've I was just
thinking I think it was this morning or
I was going to write something about it
how the size of the commitments we keep
to ourselves correlates to the size of
the the reward it spits out on the other
end so if we keep big commitments to
ourselves in terms of the impact on our
self-esteem our self-story the evidence
we have about Who We Are
it has a correlates really that's not
even a word but it has an equally big
output what do you think about that
keeping commitments to ourselves in uh
in the road the Cormac McCarthy novel
The the little boy is talking to his dad
they're sitting around a campfire and
they they've agreed to like oh split
everything evenly sort of the system
they have the Dad gives the sun like a
little more of the hot chocolate like
he's trying to be nice and the the sun's
upset and and he says Dad like you
promised we would split everything
evenly and he says Dad if you break the
little promises you'll break the big
ones I think that's such a beautiful
idea not just as a parent but as a
person right it shouldn't matter you
said hey I'm gonna get up at six
and then the alarm goes off at six and
then you hit snooze and you hit snooze
and you go I don't actually have to be
anywhere today I'll just go back to
sleep and wake up whenever I think or as
a writer like writing is not fun having
written is fun so you're always trying
to come up with reasons that you don't
have to do it today
but
if you build
you're building the muscle either way
you're either building the muscle
that says I do what I say
I
keep the commitments that I make or
you're building the muscle that says I
make excuses I don't do what I say I
can't be counted on right and so when we
think about discipline it's really about
like what promises are you going to keep
and the tricky thing is you're keeping
promises to yourself that nobody even
knows that you made right it's not it's
not like hey you made this Commitment if
I don't write this book by this time
like uh
you know I I have to do this
embarrassing thing or you know that I'm
all retired you know they're not even
you're not really putting their ass on
the line in that sense but you've said
to yourself you're going to do this
thing and building that muscle is really
important I mean I do think one of the
critical things about having a physical
practice is you are building that muscle
that muscle of like I told myself I'm
gonna do this hard thing now that hard
thing is
approaching and am I going to come up
with an excuse am I going to give myself
a way out or I'm going to do it and then
when you do it now you're in the middle
of it
and now you're tired and there's this
voice inside of you that says well no
one's watching you can stop anytime you
want just turn around just go back or
slow down
um it'd be easier if you slow down and
the muscle or the part of you that is
able to override that is a really
critical muscle
Seneca says you know we treat the body
rigorously so that it is not disobedient
to the mind
and I think about that I have a cold
Plunge at my house and there's
supposedly all these health benefits to
doing the cold plunge you know it
increases your metabolism or circulation
you know there's all these studies
and they're probably true I mean I I
they they sound like they're true I'm
not a scientist I have no idea but to me
all of that is extra to me what the cold
plunge is is that it's it's the sitting
down in the thing when I know how cold
it's going to be and I know I'm not
going to get used to it or comfortable
for at least a couple minutes right like
the the cranking of the knob in the
shower is the other version or the the
shower's not warmed up and the forcing
the step in before it's cold that's the
hell that's the health benefit like
that's the thing that you're getting out
of it is the ability to do hard stuff
that you don't want to do for uncertain
benefits or benefits way down the line
like if you can cultivate that
you're Golden That's where books come
from that's where businesses come from
that's where losing weight comes all of
it comes from the ability to do that
hard thing that you don't want when the
when the rewards are not
immediate or instantaneous and we've all
got different size muscles in that
regard sure right so some of us
can't maybe because we spiraled down we
didn't keep a commitment to ourselves
which meant that our esteem yeah lower
and then we didn't keep another
commitment because of that and now our
self-opinion or our self story of of
ourselves and our ability to do things
is so in the bin now yes that you know
it seems like we can't keep any
commitments to ourselves we're like so
self-deceptive in so many ways those
people that have really struggled and
they've tried they've struggled they've
tried they've struggled you know they
bought your book because they thought
[__] it maybe there's like a sentence in
here which is gonna gonna get me to the
gym
would you say to those people that find
themselves completely absent of apparent
discipline I think it's really important
when we when we mess up that we don't
identify with that right we identify
with the person that we want to be that
we know that we can be we identify with
the thing happening and then we fall off
right like in in um
sobriety circles they talk about like
falling off the wagon
I like the idea that the wagon is going
and you're either on the wagon or off
the wagon right and the idea when you
fall or you mess up or you make a
mistake or you break that promise like
it's still there like you can get back
on it anytime right that's kind of how I
think about it so instead of going oh
I'm a piece of [__] I'm spiraling I'm
I'm worthless it's it's like no the
thing is continued on you know I'm gonna
run and catch up to it am I going to
start to build those habits again or am
I gonna you know write it off because it
it's it's not there anymore do you know
what I mean I kind of try to think about
it that way it's like just because I've
had a bad week where I was over
scheduled or distracted or I was sick or
whatever and I wasn't writing
that doesn't mean All Is Lost like
I just have to sit down tomorrow or
better I have to sit down now and I just
have to to do a little bit right and
that's what starts that process again
um
it's it's
it's not this like
All or Nothing kind of a thing and I
think when you hear people talk that way
they don't realize but
they're actually it's actually very
convenient to be all or nothing right
like that way because it's giving you an
out or an off instead of going yeah I
did I didn't do what I was supposed to
do the last seven days
but that doesn't say anything about
right now or that doesn't say anything
about tomorrow
what's your thoughts on on how beliefs
are
I I think so much especially recently
about where our beliefs come from and
how that impacts because our confidence
is a belief in ourself and then you know
my discipline seems somewhat connected
to my beliefs and when we think about
flat earthers and their beliefs and how
you change their mind or how I change my
mind about who I am you know I think a
lot about I think if we can understand
how to create belief change we can
control much of our our own Hardware
because my Hardware seems to be this
kind of identity I I now believe about
who Stephen Bartlett is yeah and I'm
just kind of following the instruction
manual of that of those that belief sir
so how do I change that belief about who
I am yeah it is funny like there's
there's sort of the egotism of like
thinking you're better than everyone and
then there's also the kind of egotism
that happens where you're you're like
you're just obsessed with how garbage
you are you know like you're just you're
just thinking about yourself all the
time uh
when really you should just be thinking
about what you either are or aren't
doing you know
um my friend Austin Cleon talks about he
says um
do the verb instead of trying to be the
noun you know so like instead of going
like am I a writer am I not a writer you
know it's like am I writing
you know just do the thing just do the
thing
um and uh you want what you do yeah yeah
do the thing
makes a lot of sense and it's funny
because there's a two-way relationship
there I I don't do the things that I
don't think I am
yes yes if you I if if your sense of
yourself is someone who's not worth
anything
lazy lazy out of shape ugly you know
whatever the Stokes talk about how if
you make beautiful choices you are
beautiful
and I love that it's like hey am I
making good choices like am I like I
don't think about
um
you know is the book coming together is
it working is it brilliant I just go
like um I try to try to radically scale
down what I am asking of myself day to
day so like it's more am I making a
positive contribution today
like I just try to make a positive
contribution every day to what I'm what
I'm working on so
right now I'm editing my next book and
you know a couple days ago I was really
I wrote this new chapter I fixed all
this stuff and um
today
I switched
the title of a chapter from look for the
good in everyone
to find the good in everyone
which is a semantic
tiny change
but also a transformative change as to
what I'm actually arguing right and
was yesterday's work or today's work a
bigger impact on the the project
I don't know but I know that I made
positive Headway positive contributions
on both days so I did my job on both
days sometimes that's really visible and
you're moving a lot of stuff around or
you're creating a lot of stuff and then
other days
you're moving something
a millimeter this way you made positive
progress
to today or yesterday by changing that
title
um the the next half of that sentence is
like towards my goal or towards a
destination or Direction my question
there is how does how does one know the
worthwhile direction to be making
positive incremental progress in
well the Stokes would say that our goals
have to be rooted in what we control
so the epictetuses if you only enter
contests
in which winning is up to you you will
always win right and so when I'm working
on a book if my criteria is how many
copies is it going to sell how well is
it going to be received how happy is my
publisher going to be with it you know
um
how fast is it coming out you know a
bunch of these things
um well then success is determined by
people other than me right the market
the New York Times bestseller lists my
editor my agent random factors you know
but if I'm measuring myself
it's just getting closer to
the book I set out to write
is this the best that I can do is this
meaningful and important to me you know
all but I try to I try to root what I'm
doing as much as possible in my own
standards my own sense what's up to me
and then the commercial success
outside reception
all of that it's nice but it's extra and
and if it's extra then I can enjoy it
um
if it's
if it's essential
but I don't control it what I've really
set myself up for is
potential disappointment
because
the publisher could go out of business
you know the market could shift you
could get canceled you know who knows
what could happen and so the more you're
rooted in is this
your best
I think the happier you're going to be
and then weirdly you you you end up
actually doing better work because
you're focusing all your energy
like where it has impact
I'm sure you've seen this where you know
a clip
that you didn't think would do well
crushes of course and then this thing
that you were like this is amazing it
doesn't do well at all and so I think
it's not that it's random it's just that
you've got to be happy with it yeah and
I used to write a lot of quotes that
went on the internet and my best
performing quote of all time was just
it it violated all of my preconceptions
of what like a good
quote was because I just had an argument
with my girlfriend this one day
six years ago and I wrote a quote that
was like if we're in a relationship I
want to be your second priority I want
your first priority to be you and it
went on it was another couple of
sentences and this and that was that's
the thing that went viral around the
internet and it was it was
unconstrained by like my own
expectations of what a good quote was or
the pattern or the rhythmic or the
syllabics that go into a great quote it
just came from a place of like I really
had a [__] day that day yeah I mean my
girlfriend argued about me working too
much
so yeah no and yeah that's that stuff
that stuff humbles you for sure when
you're like maybe I don't know really
what I'm doing but what I also want to
take from that is like
sometimes stuff that I know I don't
think is good has done extremely well
and then stuff that I am so so proud of
has not done well and so am I gonna
trade my definition of what's good or
not good based on this fickle algorithm
or Randomness or whatever no like you
want to root your sense of whether
you're doing a good job whether you're
succeeding you want to root that as as
much as possible internally
as otherwise somebody else determines
whether you're good or not and that's
like that's not a that's not how you
want to go through life
all self-discipline begins with the body
I think so
uh
it's very hard to be emotionally
disciplined as you're stuffing your face
or if you feel like garbage right like
if I'm not taking care of myself if I'm
not sleeping
if I'm deferring maintenance right then
something stressful comes along I'm just
gonna magically step up and be able to
handle that no like when I'm
when I am
fine-tuned and finely fueled and I'm
taking care of myself
I'm in a place where
emotionally I'm much better off like
every morning I try to go for a walk I
take my kids and we just go outside and
go for a walk
and I try not to bring the phone I try
not to get distracted
is try to be present be outside
I can tell in their behavior the days
when that didn't happen
and I'm sure they can tell in my
demeanor the days that that didn't
happen right
and so taking care of yourself
physically
is setting yourself up to thrive
emotionally and temperamentally
what did stoicism say about that about
the importance of you know keeping
yourself in good shape both cognitively
physically
yeah there's a Latin expression I won't
butcher the Latin but it's basically
like a strong mind and a strong body
that you have to have both you know to
just be very well read very informed or
steeped in philosophy but to be
physically weak and and this isn't
this isn't uh meaning that you have to
be able to lift super heavy weights but
the the idea is is like are you active
are you in charge
um are you pushing yourself you know
that carries over and vice versa should
we will be pushing ourselves yeah for
sure
um physically yeah you know having
something that gets you a win every day
is
a very underrated
philosophical hack right like
um
I try to run or swim or bike every day
I'm not training for a marathon I'm not
trying to set any records I'm trying to
make a promise to myself and keep that
promise
and it doesn't matter how badly the
writing goes it doesn't matter what news
I just got from my agent you know it
doesn't matter how my business is doing
it doesn't matter what the stock
market's doing it doesn't matter what
mean thing somebody just said about me
online
um it doesn't matter if my wife and I
are getting along you know it doesn't
matter if the kids are like if I have
something that every day if I do it
I'm proud of myself for doing it I got
endorphins from doing it I got healthier
from doing it you know I I got some time
away from the screen or work or sitting
in a chair from it like that's hugely
important and it's so easy and it's
something that's up to you you know
um I've never like gone for a run and
then like not made it back you know
um
there's there's lots of days where I
don't want to do it but I'm always glad
that I did it
almost all great leaders great athletes
great philosophers have been
tough yeah
what you mean by tough
I mean they've gone through something uh
Churchill talked about how he says every
every profit every sort of great leader
a great person you know he said they're
they're of society but then they're sent
into the Wilderness right there's some
period where their work is unpopular
where their ideas aren't accepted where
they're struggling to make ends meet or
there's a controversy or whatever you
know Churchill spends
like 33 to 39
basically out of public life sort of
persona non grata and he says that it's
in this Wilderness he says where psychic
Dynamite is made
and his point is that it's it's in that
struggling in not having everyone listen
to you not getting what you want not
having everything at the push of a
button that forces you to really refine
what you think forces you to grow and
change and adapt you know Steve Jobs's
time in the wilderness is when he gets
fired from Apple and he has to go and he
starts these other companies and he has
to look in the mirror and go how did I
get fired from the company that I
started you know and and so we all have
to have that period where we are
wrestling with our demons or a demon and
it's in conquering that
changing from that that we bring back to
whatever we're doing I think a greater
sense of purpose and Clarity and then
hopefully you know better skills
and those moments make us confront our
egos yes yeah there's an ego death in
losing being rejected
realizing you're not what you thought
you were or
it's not going the way that you thought
it was going to go
and
you know ideally you want to learn that
earlier and
cheaper
you don't want to get to the very top
and have it all come crashing down and
have to start over right there were
probably many times a long Steve Jobs's
Journey where
maybe it was a tough meeting or an
investor you know laid out all the
issues to his face but there was an
article there were many moments where he
could have learned that lesson in a way
that was less calamitous than getting
fired getting thrown out
um sometimes that's what people need you
know sometimes sometimes you got to blow
your life up but
it's better that that it's better that
you listen I've said this before but
it's like you know life is always sort
of whispering feedback to you and if you
don't listen to it at some point it has
to hold you down and scream it in your
face
and uh that's avoidable
how did you tune into that voice
whispering
you know it's it's uh for the Stokes it
was like this kind of nightly or daily
conversation with the self this is the
art of journaling this is what Marcus
realist is doing in meditations he's
having a conversation with himself the
most powerful man in the world no one
could tell him what to do
key in the pages of what's become
meditations is going
why are you like this why are you doing
this you know better than this remember
what so-and-so said Remember the
examples of all these people that you
love that have inspired you that you're
trying to be like and try to get back on
the path you're trying to Define what
that path is and I think a process of
really holding yourself accountable
somehow whether it's a
a journal maybe it's quarterly meetings
with a coach or an advisor or a board of
directors
um if it's long walks or you think about
these things there's lots of ways to do
it but I think it's it's the ability to
reflect and evaluate and adjust based on
this information that's what that voice
is right the information is there maybe
deep down we know it but we kind of be
uncomfortable it'd be painful
maybe it wouldn't work
but you got to be you got to be doing
that work and again the sort of
maintenance is going to be cheaper and
easier than than the total rebuild
this third point I believe it was of
wisdom
I've been asking myself a lot recently I
sit and have conversations with some
incredibly smart people yourself
included and I I gain so much from it
sure and I think to myself
what I should really be doing is
writing more
um
what has been the value of writing on
your life the unobvious stuff the
unobvious upsides that you've
experienced from writing
nothing clarifies what you think quite
like
practice or the exercise of writing
something down at Amazon if you like if
you want to launch a new project or
you're suggesting a change if you want
to call a meeting you have to you have
to write it out you have to create a
written agenda in some cases you have to
write a press release for that thing
you're proposing you have to write like
a written pitch for
the whole thing
and it's not so much for the
communicating it to the other people
but it's also about the forcing you to
go through the process of figuring out
what you think and why and
the problems with it the contradictions
of it like for being forced to write it
down is just so different than it just
bouncing around in your head or riffing
on it there's just something very very
powerful about writing and you know
anyone that sat down to write a book I
think you think well I know this better
than anyone I'm really excited about it
then you sit down and and that kind of
enthusiasm or interest that can get you
like the first like 10 pages and then
you just go like you just spent and then
you go well what comes next and how and
how do they build on each other like you
have to have a plan you know you have to
have a system of structure you have to
have solved the whole thing before you
can write it you can't just figure it
out on the Fly Right the stream of
Consciousness stuff like it doesn't work
and so
writing is just really really powerful
I'm a huge believer in all these other
mediums and I make content in all these
other mediums but I write the ideas
first
and it comes from the books the books is
the synthesis of all of it and then if
I'm doing a tick tock or Instagram or a
an article it's all broken out from the
process of having spent many many many
hours sitting and thinking about and
trying to come up with
the best way of expressing this very
complicated idea
and you know the process now I've I've
been doing the daily Stoke so I wrote
the book in 2015 so it's one page a day
so I wrote 366 in one sitting and then
the day I finished the book I said I'm
just gonna keep going I'm just gonna do
One A Day
that we'll put out in the email on the
podcast and so I've been doing that
every day
for eight years
and uh
that's where my understanding of Stills
like obviously I knew about stoicism I'd
written books about it before I'd read
about it a lot but the process of having
to produce
and polish and edit and work on and read
and you know record this one thing every
day one thing every day has been
transformative for me as a person the
fact that you know millions of people
have read them now and listened to them
and watched them all over the world
that's just like like even if it was
never published
that process would have transformed my
life so
in a world where you know you can easily
in two seconds create high-res
immediately shareable video
like the ease of that is almost the Trap
right writing is is hard and always will
be hard and maybe that's why it's good
in the 800 days there
you've got a lot of data back on the
types of things that resonate with
people the subject matter that seems to
speak to their most popular sufferings
concerns anxieties sure what have you
what have you learned about the things
people are struggling with the most and
the answers they seek the most that's a
good question I I don't think about that
so much I I try to just follow where
it's taking me and and I just try to I'm
just always trying to make stuff but I I
it is interesting to think that people
have had the same problems for 2000
years you know like on its face
Marcus realizes meditations should be
inaccessible impractical
incomprehensible like you have
the most powerful man on Earth
emperor of Rome literally worshiped as a
God you know head of the most powerful
Army steeped in philosophy and rhetoric
and all these ancient ideas
writing probably on the front lines of
the battlefield like with the Roman army
in his tent you know in Greek he was
writing in Greek to himself
never intending it to be published
probably be mortified that it ever was
published
and he's writing it for himself like
he's writing notes that are so specific
that a lot of them we don't even know
what they mean he's like remember that
toll operator you know in insert you
know province of the Roman Empire or
remember that thing that so and so said
to you like a lot of them are kind of
notes like that so we know it wasn't for
you and I at all
this is like the literally the most
specific book you could imagine and
somehow
it is timeless and Universal
because
as different and strange and surreal as
his life and experiences
it's fundamentally not that different
than yours and mine
books say about and what does stoicism
say about how we confront unexpected
crises in our lives that we are clearly
not responsible for
you know a cancer diagnosis skip firing
get we get fired from work we something
else bad happens that we were not
responsible for
to me the essence of stoicism is the
idea that we don't control what has
happened but we control how we respond
to what happens and so you know Marcus's
idea to have tattooed on my arm the
obstacles the way you know he says the
impediment to action advances action
what stands in the way it becomes the
way he's saying it say that again
the impediment to action advances action
it stands in the way becomes the way
he's saying that you know basically it's
like nothing can actually stop us from
what we're trying to do because we can
accommodate and adjust and adapt reasons
we can convert obstacles to our own
purposes basically what he's saying is
that
stuff happens stuff we dread having
happened that we did everything in our
power to prevent from happening that's
not our fault it's totally screwed up
it's painful
all of that but it does happen right and
he says he's basically saying that
now that it's happened
what opportunity does it present you and
it doesn't mean oh hey you know your
mother died that's great for your
business that's not what he's saying
like he's not saying oh this is
wonderful but he's saying that this
tragic terrible frustrating painful
thing happened
there are opportunities in that for you
to step up to grow to be there for other
people to illustrate or demonstrate the
stoic virtues
in moments of Crisis and like business I
always think there's you have a couple
of types of people say this room is on
fire person a paralyzed with fear saying
nothing yeah person be screaming sure
also unhelpful we're gonna die person C
knows the rumors on Fire doesn't need to
say the room is on fire totally focused
on getting out of the room yes and it's
like it's a different way to handle
crisis some people just default to
practical well maybe there's another
person there to extend this analogy who
helps those other people yeah right
right like the idea the idea is the
thing is happening what is it going to
draw out of you who are you going to be
in response to that thing happening
that's what the obstacle is the way it
means it's not that it's great that the
room is on fire it's that the room being
on fire presents you a set of choices
how do I become the person who is going
to survive the fire because I'm focused
not on the fact that the room is on fire
I mean I'm aware of that I'm not denying
the reality of the burning room but I'm
using my energy on what I can control
which is getting myself and these other
people out of the room how can is it a
practice is it like going to the gym
some people just seem to have it you
know childhood trauma seems to play into
that as well because some people just
have a pessimistic attitude to things
and they worry and panic but that is
kind of the practice right like what
they have been through they have been in
rooms that were on fire before different
kinds of fire but this isn't a new
situation to them right and that is one
of the things also that we can say to
ourselves when we're going through [__]
right whether it's this pandemic or it's
this downturn in your business or it's
this you know employee who stole from
you or whatever you go
this is practice this is reps right like
I am going to emerge out of the other
side of this
a person who has been through things
like this
and if you haven't before if this is the
first time yeah maybe you won't handle
it great but you will you can decide to
be the person who has learned
from that process
I guess the danger is I go through it
once and it's so horrific that I avoid
all circumstances or environments where
I might ever go through such a thing
again yes so you have emerged weaker and
more fragile for what's for what you've
gone through which is probably not the
way to do it you know
um I've said this to people it's like
hey we just lived through this massive
historical event together
we're here like we made it you know it's
not to say anything about the people who
didn't make it what I mean is like we
got through it if you had asked
that person in March 2020 if they could
get through three years of a pandemic
millions of people died where everything
was shut down where there was political
unrest and supply chain and logistic
Logistics crises and everyone had to
work from home and you know down the
list of all that stuff even just half of
it they would have said like so I lost
everything right like you know like it
destroyed me right I can't I don't have
what it takes to get through that but
you did because you didn't get through
all of it at once it was one thing after
another and you adjusted and you adapted
and you got stronger as you went and you
just realize
as you go through things
exactly what Seneca says like the person
who hasn't been tested doesn't know but
when you have been tested when you have
gone through things you can take from
that a sense of your capacities your
capabilities which are almost always
greater than you think they are
and so
it's just a way to go through life you
know you don't want it to be that way
you would prefer that it didn't happen
that way that the things went the way
they were supposed to go but they didn't
and now they are the way that they are
and now I have to call this person into
my office and let them go you know now I
have to
suddenly raise X millions of dollars to
keep the business going if we're going
to have any hope of surviving and I've
got 30 days to do it right like
the situation is the situation and what
is it going to teach me how am I going
to grow from how am I going to be better
for it
I was watching a video you made about
um swistoic questions that are really
important to ask ourselves
I guess to keep us on track to some
degree
um
what kind of questions do you find
yourself frequently asking yourself to
help keep yourself on track
yeah I mean the big one that I asked
myself the most as a parent is I just go
does this matter
like why why does this thing matter like
is this thing that I'm about to argue
with them or force them to do or feel
insecure about
does it actually matter right and
the answer is almost always no it
doesn't matter it's made up
[Music]
five more minutes is fine right in the
big scheme of things I won't care about
this and so I try to ask myself
questions that give me perspective that
take me out of whatever my immediate
impulse is or insecurity is or worry is
or argument is and I try to get
perspective and I think that's what
great questions do is they give you
prospective different way of seeing
things
that you can then hopefully act on
what did the stock say about like
relationships and romantic relationships
and love
I mean
what they say about them
to me is secondary to the fact that they
were also in them right like you know
it's one thing to be a philosopher and
then another to get married to a person
who you now live with
um who does things that drive you crazy
and you do things that drive them crazy
and you have resentments and you have
insecurities and you have compromises
that you have to make right
um I remember my wife said to me one
time this is a great question or a great
way of thinking about it I said I was
like it's you're I said she was
frustrating me
and she's kicked back a very stoic idea
she said um
uh a person she said I can't frustrate
you
she was basically saying like we're
responsible for our own emotions like
she's doing what she's doing and I am
feeling the frustration I can't make
that her fault right and I think about
that often right like uh she weaponized
terrorism against you yes all the time
her joke is um one of us is a stoic and
the other writes about stoicism
she's much more naturally these things
than I am I would say but you know it's
the idea that
how you
make it work in not in theory not in
your books is uh
it's the whole the whole business you
know like I think every person who's
ever been married or in a relationship
you know you get yourself in these
situations where you've decided that
being right is more important than being
happy or than getting along or sounds
like Twitter moving on yeah right yeah
you're just like what are you doing you
know you're putting this thing over the
relationship
um Twitter is its own set of
philosophical issues I just I you just
watch people
voluntarily seek out conflict and things
to be upset about like if they didn't
see the tweet it wouldn't bother them
yeah but they they picked it up they're
supposed to be
having dinner with someone they care
about they're supposed to be working
supposed to be playing with their kids
but instead they took up the phone and
they scrolled through and the phone
which knows the things that outrage you
or the ones that get the most engagement
magically serves up the outrage and then
you are outraged and you cannot go back
to what you were doing until you let
this person know
this person you've never met they are
wrong and you are right you know and
that is the opposite of philosophy
happiness the good life
um somehow I said he deleted it from his
phone for this very reason last year he
doesn't tweet anymore it's not involved
in Twitter because he said when I look
at the relationship I had with this
device it was just causing me
unhappiness he says every bad thing
every professional crisis I've had
started with Twitter
and have you ever once gone on it or any
of the apps
whether you spent five seconds or
50 minutes and thought that was a great
use of my time I'm really glad I did
that you know you always feel a little
guilty after you go oh that went back
faster than I thought
um and again I'm not saying that there's
not a place for these things that they
don't do some good I mean maybe someone
is watching a clip of this thing
literally right in this instance and
that's better than you know us trying to
sit here and Pander to one side or
incite the other there's definitely
people some people do it better than
other people or worse than other people
but
for the most part
how do you create distance and
boundaries
that separate you from these things so
yeah I don't have any of them on my
phone either and I don't know the
password to the Daily stoic or my
personal Twitter account so if there's
something I need to say I can talk to
someone who works for me and make sure
that gets out and then maybe I can ask
you know hey how did it go but for the
most part
um
I have enough inputs
you know what I mean I have enough
inputs I don't need more I don't need
more random people
uh
this is this is the most important space
that you have you know and how
protective of it are you
and
cultivating a Stillness or a space a
distance from that to me is like the
most important thing
you've read so much
you write so much you have the the
wisdom of a of someone who is who has
lived many many lives
that's what reading is by the way you
know what I mean reading is is maybe the
only way
that you can live multiple lives
like you think about
the millions of people who have done
crazy things groundbreaking things
terrible things
and you think of all that wisdom it's
all there in books and you know it's ten
dollars sometimes it's a dollar isn't it
funny how similar the wisdom is though
yeah I think the more you read that you
you come up with some sort of themes it
boils down eastern and western
philosophy kind of like a horseshoe you
know they come come together towards the
the ends but what are those themes
what are the themes of living a good
life that I must know first would be
let's say if you focus on what's in your
control I think it's up to you okay what
does that mean in practice in in
day-to-day life so someone cuts me off
in traffic yeah uh somebody you don't
somebody doesn't like something that you
did uh the weather you know how much of
your energy are you spending emoting
about complaining about worrying about
things that are not up to you and what
do the is there any particular examples
from stoicism where
well epic fetus is like that's our first
job in life separate things into two
categories is this up to me or is this
not up to me and it's a resource
allocation issue right like if you are
focused in your energy even half of it
on stuff that's not up to you that's
half your energy that's not being
focused on the stuff you can
make a difference on it's like that'd be
like putting 50 of
the the power of your car on the wheels
that aren't touching the ground you know
like you want to put it where it's going
to get traction that's the a key thing
in life is this up to you or not
number two uh there's something magical
about water and there's something
magical about long walks
this is where
find a lot of Peace find a lot of
inspiration find a lot of calmness and
Stillness like
I'm not saying that taking a walk will
solve all of your problems I'm just
saying that there's very few problems
that are made worse by taking a walk
same goes for
jumping in the swimming pool or the
ocean yeah what is it about those two
things that you believe I mean look I
think we evolved traveling very long
distances I mean some of the oldest
evidence of human beings in America are
a set of footprints of a mother carrying
and setting down carrying and setting
down a child 20 000 years ago in white
sand what is now White Sands New Mexico
like that's just what we've been doing
for as long as there are food people
and there's something about the rhythm
of it the movement of it
that
slows us down forces us to think makes
us very present
it's just magic and I think there's a
reason that every
religious tradition or
zen garden has a water fountain or
something you know there's just
something about sound of water
it's so true all of my
best ideas either come usually in the
gym or in the shower yeah I mean I don't
do a lot of walking because I got it but
in the gym in the shower I seem to get
my Epiphany moments yes taking a break
from what you're doing to go do one of
those things often unlocks a lot of
stuff
okay and you have that as a ritual every
day every day every single day yeah yeah
try to take a walk every day what else
are sort of rituals in your life the
daily rituals so I would add as a third
one as a ritual I'd be I'd say like do
something hard every day like do
something physically difficult every day
the art of challenging oneself and
pushing those limits and boundaries that
is a
a central practice and skill
that will help you whatever life has in
store for you and is that is that the
third one on this list yeah the third
okay I love that one so do something
difficult every day and that ranges from
as small as
not eating the cheeseburger to as big as
running a marathon yeah I mean not
eating a cheeseburger that's not I
wouldn't put that I I wouldn't go hey
like I really challenged myself today I
didn't eat garbage I would say it's like
here's the positive thing that I did
right like I lifted I lifted heavy rocks
you know I went for I did some sprinting
I went for a bike ride you know I uh
I went for a run I took a spin class you
know whatever it is the walk doesn't
count the walk is for the mental health
yeah you got to do something for the
physical health okay so four I think we
have to put something here about
like we are made for each other right
the the the idea of uh meaning comes
from servicing or contributing to the
common good
Marcus realist talks about the common
good maybe 40 50 times in meditations
um you know he says like we're put here
for other people
um
our job is to is to help others to you
know leave this place better than you've
like leave this place better than you
found it
to me that's the meaning of life right
there
so what is the positive contribution
what is the Legacy you're leaving not
how much money did you make you know
what records did you break but what is
the What is the
contribution you are making to the
collective that's
meaning and purpose and
quite frankly your obligation as a human
being
service
and then the fifth one the fifth one is
is
why don't you just pause there and I
forgot to ask you for an example and the
third one from stoicism of doing
something hard yeah like a I mean the
Greeks trained in wrestling the gymnasia
was the central part of the Roman life
you know you'd go and you you'd train
you know
um
what
were they aiming at when they were
training what were the means a strong
mind and a strong body like to not be
flabby and lazy and uh not to fight each
other or anything but no but I mean
there's something about Combat Sports
you know that I think is is very Primal
and probably good for you
um you know just something about
the challenge of
of of pushing oneself not living this
sort of sedentary lifestyle I think
that's you know whether you're talking
about Zen Buddhists practicing martial
arts or are you talking about the Romans
you know
uh uh practicing wrestling I think the
philosophical tradition is it's it's
wrong to think of
philosophers as soft
I always wonder if there's something
innate in human beings that we we're
designed to need struggle like we're
designed to because if you think about
we're in a big building here and with
all these all this stuff that humans
came up with and the cameras that they
they our ancestors just struggled
forward
to create all this stuff so is it
conceivable that they left something in
me that says you two shall struggle
forward yeah you're you are an error to
people who crossed oceans
fought in Wars braved the elements
you know lived through poverty and
depressions
[Music]
sacrificed struggled you know
they did all that and you have that in
you you know you have that in you we all
do and here we are ordering candies
Wi-Fi robot
um and and going ah the air conditioning
isn't at the exact temperature
and number five number five across all
religious and
philosophical traditions there is some
version of the practice of Memento Mori
remember you are mortal that life is
short
talk about
top of the list of things that you don't
control right uh is death and the
acceptance and the submission to that
fact the awareness the urgency the
perspective that that gives you is one
of the most
essential philosophical practices there
is like why do we procrastinate why do
we not prioritize our health why do we
not do the stuff that we know we should
do
it's because we think we have forever
you know we think we're Invincible
um and it's only you know in light of a
pandemic
a call from the doctor you know a loved
one suddenly going that we get these
brief moments of clarity it goes oh wait
[__] no you can go at any moment
[Music]
um
Mark's realist is you could leave life
right now let that determine what you do
and say and think
now if you sang that in a time where
he buried six children six children
that's how
deadly and unforgiving the ancient world
was and he was even then having to
remind himself hey
don't procrastinate don't think you have
forever you know don't take life for
granted and here you know when the
average lifespan is so much longer like
inconceivably long compared to the
ancients
where you know you might never see
someone die in your whole life until you
are in a hospital bed you know we have
we live in even more of a bubble you
know we are even more sheltered we are
even more detached from
the reality of uh
of our mortality as they say death is
the only prophecy that never fails like
people think about like well what would
I do if I found out
that I had cancer like if you got a
terminal diagnosis from a doctorate but
what changes would I make
but the reality is you do have a
terminal diagnosis like the second you
were born the doctor knew with a hundred
percent certainty that you would die
you just didn't know when you know it
could be
eight years from now could be eight
decades from now we don't know
but to live in ignorance
or in rejection of that fact is to
set yourself up I think
more often than not to waste your life
and so some practice
of
hey
time is ticking by now in this very
moment how am I spending it
there's a sound timer
oh yeah yeah that's beautiful it sounds
to remind me of that very very fate of
all these things Ryan what is the what
is the stoic wisdom that you continually
struggle with the most
um
you know I think people think that
stoicism is about the suppression of
emotion that's what the word stoic means
to people right emotionless robotic
superhuman Etc I don't think that's it
at all
um I don't think that's possible
if you're stuffing the emotions down if
you're pretending they don't exist
they do exist and they will eventually
reveal themselves you've just
deferred it maybe with some interest
attached right so
for me like when I'm feeling something
when I'm having big feelings as we say
to my kids you're having big feelings
well why are you having those feelings
what is the cause of those feelings what
does your body feel like and the the
practice of going I'm feeling this
I'm feeling this because
I'm feeling as a result of that an
inclination to do
and then go but is that a good idea you
know is that what I want to do like I've
never lost my temper and then afterwards
been like I'm so glad I did that you
know I'm I always regret it always right
I've never forced my kids to do
something out of frustration and then
been like yeah that was definitely the
right call you know afterwards I'm like
we had so much more time than I was
under the impression we did you know
what I mean it's like like getting this
big fight to leave the house and then we
get there and then we're like waiting in
the car five minutes to go in you know
or whatever right like uh or you're so
stressed about missing the flight and
then you you get there or you don't get
there and neither one of those things
it's like a matter of life and death
right so I think for me seeing stoicism
as the practice of understanding the
emotion
processing the emotion
and then not being
a slave to that emotion is the practice
of stoicism
that I think I struggle with but I think
when you read the private thoughts of
the stoics
you see that they were also struggling
with
you know
um
people are frustrating
things are annoying you know things go
sideways but then how you deal with that
that's what that's what matters
and that's the control you have yeah
and it is a practice isn't it because we
all get frustrated with things I get
frustrated with so many things yeah
because you have high standards you have
expectations
wanting things to be a certain way
needing them to be a certain way that's
like the root of so much of the tension
or problems that we
we have and the question I ask is why
why do I need them to be a certain way
yeah you don't
you go I need everything to be a certain
way or I won't be able to do what I do
and then you're like wait how fragile am
I that I can't
I can't adjust I can't adapt you know
what I mean like you it's because you
can want it or request it or you think
you should have it that's what sets you
up but epic Jesus thing is he says like
I don't want things to be a certain way
want them to be the way that they are
that is the path to peace
I think about it's like hey
like if I wake up and I go I need the
weather to be a certain way today well
then there's a pretty big chance
that I'm not gonna be happy
I was talking to my friend his name
Shaka Smarties the head basketball coach
at Marquette he lived in Texas he was
the head coach at Texas and um
he uh he moved to Marquette where it's
colder and I said what's it what's the
weather shift like I said something like
you know are you are you more of a hot
weather guy or a cold weather guy you
know and um he goes I'm a dress for the
weather guy
and I was like that is stoicism right
there dress for the weather you know
like I don't care what it is I'm good
I'm good either way yeah I'll figure it
out
I love that
and the conflict I have is
the stoics must have understood the
importance of detail and small things
sure so yes you know that's why yeah but
at the same time they also understand
how that can quite easily rob you of
that Obsession to detail yeah or like
routine is important right this is the
order I like to do things this is when
I'm at my best
but what if that routine becomes
almost
a religion
which becomes almost a kind of fragility
you know that's the problem [__] [__]
what am I gonna do I need I need my
special socks you know or whatever
um I can't no I need 10 minutes before
and you're like
okay you know you're not defusing a
nuclear bomb here like
it's gonna be fine
two things can be true at the same time
yeah it's better well the stoic say um
there's
there's such a thing as preferred
indifference
so the basically the stocks are like if
it's in your control
great it's not under control it's not
worth thinking about
but they said they're still
some things
it's better to have than not have right
like like it's better to be rich than
poor it's better for it to be you know
nice weather not nice weather right and
so the idea is you're going to be fine
regardless
right so if you can you can go I am good
I'm a dress for the weather guy I can
thrive in any and all situations right
that's
the first thing that has to be true and
then the second thing is to be true
which can be true is but if you ask me
what I want here this here's the
circumstances or situation that if it's
in my power that's what I'm going to
choose I don't need it I can do great in
any in all situations but
if you ask me do I want it to be cold in
here or warm in here I'm going to tell
you the temperature that I like because
I know that if it gets too hot and I
start to feel warm and then I get
distracted you know like you can you can
know what it's nice to have but not need
it
of all the of all the things that you
know you've read about in um stoic
philosophy and wisdom
fewer
lying on your deathbed and you had the
entirety of the world as the audience oh
and you could just say one thing that
you believed would be as of most benefit
to that audience
to relieve them of their suffering the
most to you know to leave them with one
last statement from Ryan holiday drawn
from his readings of
stoic wisdom and philosophy oh
what might be the Insight the last daily
stoic
what would I say it's a short last
breath
we know Marcus aurelius's sort of Last
Words his last words in in meditations
are about sort of
hey man this is the play it only got
three acts curtains coming down did you
do a good job you started talking to
himself like that it's pretty beautiful
and then
in real life he's probably dying of the
plague
uh
he
his friends are all around him and
they're weeping and crying
and he goes
what are you crying about like
don't think about me so think about your
you think about your life
go try to
you know
do what you can with the time that you
have left
and
maybe I'd say something like that like
hey the whole
the one
the one benefit of people dying
is the one way that they
can go on living after they die
one way they can improve us and help us
after they're gone is is the reminder of
the fact that they're not here which
will be true for you at some point and
that's one of the things that the loss
of people that we love can do for us
it's like hey none of us get forever
the song ends at some point
and so what did you um
what did you do
with the time that you've got
and the fact that you get tomorrow and I
don't
is a gift that you should not take for
granted
into your kids
oh
I think I would just I think I'd just
say
you know what I try to just say all the
time which is like
I love you I'm proud of you
and you're you're good you know what I
mean I think I think it's it's really
easy
especially in today's world
for everything to feel like conditional
you know that
you gotta earn it and there are things
you have to earn in life you know but
A Parent's Love A sense of worth and
sort of dignity uh value that's that's
that's in an innately
intrinsically
uh
given thing at Birth right and so I
don't know I meant I might just take one
one extra shot at that
if this um if you want to be successful
at that point when you're laying there
on your deathbed yeah if you were
answered to that question that
they uh positive markets Marcus's play
my godson's called Marcus actually
because of Marcus
um
but if you had lived a successful life
at that point what would that mean for
you
yeah
um I mean I feel I feel lucky
in that I don't wake up and think
there's all this stuff that I have to do
do you know what I mean like I I'm not
saying like uh
I've done everything that I want to do
but I'm saying like
with the time that I have had
I have I have
I feel like I've checked most of the
boxes
of
you know reaching the potential that I
have paying back
debts or gifts that I was given
um you know mastered things uh made a
positive contributions like I I I'm I
feel I'm good do you know what I mean
and so I wake up with this sense of
living
in the bonus that it's all extra
which is nice because
I think early on in my life I felt a lot
of pressure
and I was
demanded or asked a lot of myself
and the ability to be like I did it
um and now every extra minute or day
that I get is
is extra that's like that's where you
want to get
I think
ladies and gentlemen I'm interrupting
this broadcast with a very special
announcement two years ago I started
writing a book based on everything I've
learned from doing this podcast and
meeting all of the incredible people
that have had the privilege of meeting
but also from my career in business from
running my marketing businesses my
software business my investment fund and
everything else that I've been doing in
business and life and from this I've
created a brand new book called The
Diary of a CEO the 33 laws for business
and life if you want to build something
great all become great yourself like the
guests that I've sat here and
interviewed I ask you please please
please read these 33 laws the book I
always should have written if you like
this podcast this book is for you and it
is available now in the description of
this podcast below and every single day
until it's out later this month one
person that pre-orders it that takes a
picture of their pre-order uploads it to
their story on Instagram or social media
and tags me will win a Gold version of
this book so find by me and there's only
33 copies of those available
so pre-order it now tag me on social
media when you do
and 33 of you are going to win a very
very special book a quick word on huel
as you know they're a sponsor of this
podcast and I'm an investor in the
company one of the things I've never
really explained is how I came to have a
relationship with huel one day in the
office many years ago a guy walked past
called Michael and he was wearing a
heeled t-shirt and I was really
compelled by the logo I just thought
from a design aesthetic point of view it
was really interesting and I asked him
what that word meant and why he was
wearing that T-shirt and he said it's
this brand called heal and they make
food that is nutritionally complete and
very very convenient and has the planet
in mind and he the next day dropped off
a little bottle of fuel on my desk and
from that day onwards I completely got
it because I'm someone that cares
tremendously about having a
nutritionally complete diet but
sometimes because of the way my life is
that falls by the wayside so if there
was a really convenient reliable
trustworthy way for me to be
nutritionally complete in an affordable
way I was all ears especially if it's a
way that is conscious of the planet give
it a chance give it a shot let me you
know what you think
we have a closing tradition on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question for the next guest not knowing
who they're leaving it for and the
question that's been left for you is
what would you do all day
if you didn't have to work and I'm
actually going to give you contacts
first time I've done this I'm gonna give
you some context on this I'd never tell
anybody who's written the question but
this was a long conversation with
someone at the helm of artificial
intelligence and at the very end of our
conversation we reached this point where
he believes that in the future in the
very near future because of artificial
intelligence we're not going to have
jobs yeah and I've been wrestling with
this idea so what do we do Universal
basic income what do people do with
their time do people need meaning in
their lives and where are we going to
find meaning if it's not in struggle so
in a world of
you know what artificial intelligence is
running everything
what would Ryan holiday choose to do at
this time
I don't know how how
I think it's a it's it's uh
I like that I don't think I would make
that many radical changes in my life
like
I wake up early
I go outside and spend time with my kids
I take them to school
and I sit down and I write and I write
for me you know I write what I am
interested in what makes me better what
challenges me what I think is
philosophically interesting and
provocative
and then that goes to someone else who
takes it out and puts it into the world
right
um and I you know I try to do something
hard
I challenge myself physically then I go
home I spend time with my family I putz
around on my Ranch that I live on you
know do some manual labor sometimes
um
and then you know I tag my kids and I go
to bed what do you think of chat GPT in
these large language models and how
they're going to impact writers and
knowledge and
I think
because I could go in there right now
and say give me a novel in the style of
Ryan holiday I mean I I did I did an
email I I asked chat gbt I said write a
daily stoic email
on the subject of change and I said
write me a daily Stoke email on the
subject of replaceability
and uh it did okay you know it wasn't
it wasn't as good as what I could do
maybe in 10 years or a year it'll be
better
but I still had to edit it I still had
to refine it and then also I I had the
idea to have it do that you know the the
upside down urinal is Art because
someone decided to put a urinal upside
down and said that is Art and so you
know the intentionality is still the
main thing and then the refining and the
polishing and the changing is what makes
it's what the role of the human is and
so I I
haven't seen a ton of change in my life
and that I haven't been here for 80
years but you know
I remember when Google books came out
and a bunch of authors said it's not the
same as going to a library and looking
in the book physically you shouldn't
just be able to search books and find
what you want
so they continue to do it the way they
used to do it
and US younger people took advantage of
this thing that saved us time and let us
do more right and
I don't know maybe it will replace all
of us as everyone for all time has you
know every job has been replaced in some
form or another or maybe it just becomes
a tool in the toolkit and I think the
job of uh
of each of us is to
figure out how to use it
and not be used by it you know
well let's hope so yes I'm sorry yeah I
suspect you'll be right at least in the
the short and mid term anyway actually
knows off into the future what the world
looks like probably got more pressing
issues but uh but Ryan thank you for
your time thank you for having me this
is very cool this book actually sits on
my bedside because my girlfriend has
stolen it from oh amazing she's reading
it and she's also reading your um daily
it's the daily stoic book she's she'll
be on a on a silent Retreat as I as we
record this and she'll have it with her
oh that's amazing she reads one page
every day I love it um she's Portuguese
so it's helping her with her English as
well so
um but your books have stretched all
across the world and reached into so
many people's lives in such an
incredible way it's really an important
important thing that you do I know you
know this you must know this because you
must get these messages and people must
tell you in the tens of hundreds of
thousands but I've seen firsthand how
your work has and your ability to reach
back into history and pull out wisdom
that's so relevant and important to
people's daily lives has had a profound
impact that's a really special thing
Ryan it's a really special thing that's
very cool and I know you do it I want to
ask you the question why you do it you
know you pointed at the selfish reason
yeah but the consequence of that is so
selfless
um and I thank you on behalf of all of
those incredible people and it's an
honor to meet you as well because these
books have been these are ornaments in
my household and these are very
important parts of of my development so
thank you Ryan thank you appreciate it
as you know Zoe our sponsor of this
podcast and I'm a big investor in the
company you guys know I'm really sitting
still because that's just the nature of
my life so whether I'm in a business
meeting with my investments or I'm
recording this podcast I'm always
running from A to B but the one promise
that I made to myself is to fuel my body
sufficiently and Zoe has been really the
key part of me succeeding in that
mission for those of you that don't know
I've been a Zoe member for about a few
months now ever since I had Zoe's
scientific co-founder Professor Tim
Spector on this podcast Zoe helps me to
understand how to make better food
choices for my long-term health and it's
all personalized to me eating the right
food is essential for me to keep me
going because some of my meetings are
often later in the day and so I need to
ensure that I keep my energy levels up
and Zoe allows me to understand which
foods work for me and which foods don't
eating the Zoe way I don't get that
dreaded afternoon crash and I feel great
so to get started with Zoe go to zoe.com
Steven and use my exclusive code
ceo10 for 10 off so many of you have
been asking me for discount code here it
is ceo10 go to zoe.com
Steven and use my exclusive code ceo10
for 10 off and if you already use Zoe
send me a DM and let me know how you're
getting on
foreign
[Music]